01-12-2017
I figure #devember might be a good opportunity to get this done. And while
a text file on github isn't the most amazing devlog, it'll have to do.
Well, I want a flexibles simulation software for the logistic branching
process, described here:

Lambert, Amaury. The branching process with logistic growth. Ann. Appl. Probab. 15 (2005), no. 2, 1506--1535. doi:10.1214/105051605000000098. https://projecteuclid.org/euclid.aoap/1115137984

and while I have previously done it with Gillespie's algorithm, it's just too
slow for my use case. So instead, I'm going to implement it with tau leaping.

Also some required features:
 - Reproduction rate and maybe death rate need to be
   highly customizable.
 - They need to be time-variable according to some user-set protocol.
   Possibly a protocol dependent on system state.
 - Cells need several types of possible genomes
    - Limited discrete type (SNPs and stuff)
    - Unlimited discrete type (why not?, possibly single sided limit?)
    - Limited continuous type (Like protein expression)
    - Unlimited continuous type (completionism yo)
   So probably implement that with templates for maximum speed.


02-12-2017
After attempting to hit Ballmer's peak yesterday I'm immediately behind
schedule. Let's catch up today.
First, the CRAPL-License covers my concerns about opensourcing my scientific
code before I use it myself, so included that.
Onto a more important development question. The logistic equation has an
interaction effect term. with ' denoting a derivative

Z' = b*Z - c*Z²    (1)
            ^
            this is the interaction effect

and the branching process analogue has 3 relevant rates

per cell:
a constant birthrate p
a constant deathrate d
deathrate from competition c(n-1)

or for the total population of n particles:
birthrate p*n
deathrate d*n + c*n*(n-1)

And the grand question is, which of these variables should be allowed to vary
with the genome. I figure, I should allow any to vary for generality. But
for optimization I think it will be extremely useful if the program knows
which one's are constant. Can I use some type-trait construct to let the
computation core know what it can simplify?

First objective then:
Make simulation core, that takes a cell object by template.
Use gillespies algorithm to simulate for a set amount of time, no optimizations.
Cell objects need to have:
  mutate()
    change the genome, called for any new cell
  get_event_rate(n)
    get total event rate, dependent on n (if c != 0)
  do_event()
    if cell is selected, do an event.

This should give me something to start with, total code will probably need to go
through a couple of development iterations.


04-12-2017
Summing up todays and yesterdays bit of coding.
Super simple implementation finished. Now for lots of improvements to be made :)
For the reader who doesn't know, Gillespies algorithm is this really simple way
of simulating a stochastic process.

Imagine you have some things that happen at rates a, b, and c.
The events are uncorrelated in time, so knowing when the last happened doesn't
predict when the next one will. Well it turns out that the waiting time
between events for of these processes is exponentially distributed with rate a,
b or c. But waiting time between any event is exponentially distributed with
rate a + b + c.

So, we wait for that long, then we do an event. To know what event to do is
also really simple. Just use a categorical distribution, so select a rate
weighting by the rates.
i.e.
select a with probability a / (a + b + c)
select b with probability b / (a + b + c)
select c with probability c / (a + b + c)
And then do the event.
This is an exact simulation, so that's nice, but it scales super bad when there
is a large number of possible events. Since every cell in my simulation has
a rate (actually 3 rates), then it becomes pretty much impossible to use this
algorithm. Because I'd like to simulate about 100 000 cells or more.

That's why I need tau-leaping. But explaining that I will leave for another day.


07-12-2017
I ougth to be better at writing in this every day.
Did some testing with the current program, and with minor updates I think
it now simulates correctly. Added some more to the printing for testing that.
Eventually, printing should probably be abstracted out somehow. Probably some
more advanced recording class thing (I think tree based is the way to go this
time). Also started working on minor optimization right away, that I think will
be a neccessary part.

Basically if the birth/death/interaction-death rates dont change, then there is
no need to sample them from every cell. So the LB-process should get that info
from the cell type and automatically restructure the simulation loop to
not do any more calculations than neccessary. Because if they dont change
then getting the value once and multiplying with cell count is vastly better
than summing over all cells every step.

I think a similar thing could maybe be included if only discrete types are used.
Then it could get values for each type only once (assuming they only depend
on discrete type) and multiply by number of that type present. Continuous
types present the biggest slowdown here it seems.


08-12-2017
This optimization idea turns out to be fairly tricky to implement. The problem
is that I need a vector of individual cell rates to select the cell. But this
is hugely wasteful to calculate. I could use a valarray to try and use
parallelization for summing the known constants, but that's barely faster.

Maybe a binary search for a certain point in the event_rate vector assuming
I have a vector of the varying part and know the constant part. Then I can reduce
N summations to log(N) summations + multiplications. Sounds faster in theory
anyway?
 - Nope, probably not. Supposedly, the std::discrete_distritbution runs in
   amortized constant time, so log(N) isn't going to beat that.
   UPDATE:
   Yes, probably. operator() for the discrete distribution is amortized constant
   but the constructor is linear in the number of items. Maybe because
   it has to normalize the weights.

I suppose just summing the known constant rates and initializing the vector to
that is the best I can do? Or maybe not! This finer details of this optimization
will probably wait until after implementing tau-leaping, because I expect that
to have the biggest contribution.


09-12-2017
Code not provided but:
Tested discrete_distribution scaling, and indeed it seems to be linear in the
number of items to choose from. Testing reveals that the sampling bit is
constant time, as specified, and the constructor is linear, also as specified.
So I'm glad that it follows the standard then :)

This means that there is maybe some optimization there for me. It would rely
on knowing the total so that no normalization step is neccessary.

I think this optimiztion is totally premature however. So I'll leave it for now.


10-12-2017
Initial work on tau-leaping algorithm. Check out this paper for details:

Gillespie, D. T. (2001). "Approximate accelerated stochastic simulation of chemically reacting systems" (PDF). The Journal of Chemical Physics. 115 (4): 1716. doi:10.1063/1.1378322

and the idea is to select with something from this maybe:

Cao, Y.; Gillespie, D. T.; Petzold, L. R. (2006). "Efficient step size selection for the tau-leaping simulation method" (PDF). The Journal of Chemical Physics. 124 (4): 044109. doi:10.1063/1.2159468. PMID 16460151

Hopefully, my studying of this paper so that I know what to do counts as
coding :)


11-12-2017
So, remember Gillespie's direct algorithm which I described?
Basically, it consisted of two things:
1. Wait for the next reaction
2. Select reaction
And the problem is that as the number of things in simulation grows, the
waiting time shrinks. So a time interval will contain a vast number of
events, and this makes simulation slow. Also, the point of the algorithm
is to look at the small stochastic effects present when there are rare
cells/particles/whatever. But the main slowdown comes from the things of
which there are plenty. So tau-leaping tries to circumvent this.

Consider instead hopping forward a fixed amount in time. If we knew how
the number and types of events in that interval are distributed then we
can sample it super easily and take comparatively huge time-steps.
However, this becomes inaccurate if some cell goes extinct within the
interval (and probably if something becomes extant too). So the trick is
to take steps that are small enough that this is unlikely, and to do
exact simulations only when absolutely neccessary.

More precisely, the inaccuracy happens when an event probability changes
during the time hop.

Assuming this, updating a cell count basically becomes
x += P(r, dt)
where P is the poisson distribution. (super simplified)

The speedup comes from making sure that the jump is long enough that
the higher cost of calculating it outweighs the cost of exactly calculating
that many reactions. And it comes at the price of accuracy. If we take
infinitesimal jumps then it is exactly equivalent, though ofc, much slower.

Looking at the tau-leaping method now, I see what might be a problem for my
use case. Consider having a continuous genome variable. Well, do we also
need to consider reaction paths for the (infinite) other cells whose
genome is currently non-existant? In that case, this method is intractable.
Although
The expected number of these events is surely 0 right? I.e. the rate for the
poisson distribution is 0, so they cannot happen.
Counter-although
Isn't this also a problem for extant continuous cells? I.e. would we have to
sample the poisson for each and every one? and would that even be exact enough
since they are now not numerous and probably don't fulfill assumptions?

Assuming the mutation for continuous types is something simple (like normal
distribution) it is simple enough to estimate the effect over a tau-leap.
So that is no problem.

Well, shit. Does this mean I have to change the project name? xD
Because I'm simply not willing to scap continuous types.
And because I've researched it before, there is afaik no way of estimating
the distribution of a continuous type in a branching walk when the
fitness parameter depends on the continuous type. Or atleast, it's an
unsolved problem mathematically.

From my experimentation, the continuous parameter distribution is simply
shifted at a speed depending on the derivative of fitness along the
continuous variable. (This assumes gaussian mutation). If I could prove
that this is a reasonable assumption, then I could still use tau-leaping
probably. I could just count everything which differs only by a continuous
parameter as one group, then replicate and sample from the new shifted
distribution.

How annoying...

Update: logically, what I just said probably isn't a reasonable assumption.
Because if it is true, the distribution of a continuous parameter can never
change, only move. And why would that be true?


12-12-17
So I guess this is turning more into a maths project than a programming one.
Todays reading:

David F. Anderson (2007). A modified next reaction method for simulating chemical systems with time dependent propensities and delays. The Journal of Chemical Physics 127, 214107 (2007); https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2799998 

If tau-leaping is infeasible for my system, lets investigate a better exact
method.


20-12-17
Schedule went to hell, and I suppose I failed the challenge or something.
Anyway, the modified next reaction method above seems interesting to implement,
so that's what I'm gonna do. Maybe good approximations will jump out at me
eventually. So, the above approach requires keeping some variables for
each reaction type, or cell type in my case.
So I think i will have like:
Simulation engine:
  Owns structure of state objects:
    each state objects holds a cell type reference
    state object can represent multiple cells
    maybe let cell-rates depend on the simulation engine state vector
      => evolutionary game theory


21-12-17
So in my current implementation, I select cells based on a total event rate.
This then requires selecting event in a cell, with yet another random number.
So that's three random numbers per event, even worse than normal gillespie.
For changing to the next reaction method, probably I should just treat all
three (birth, death, interaction death) as separate 'reactions'.

But I need some connectivity between these events right? Because in a death
event it's very possible that a birth and death events are eliminated. Thus
having connectivity means I would save two recalculations of the propensity
function. Ofc, if I'm alredy doing over half a million recalculations does
two extra really matter? I guess it's simpler to just cull any reactions
that yield a 0 for the propensity function.
ALTHOUGH, that might be wrong. We can imagine a situation where an event
should exist but doesn't happen during some interval. For instance,
treatment could make one cell type effectively stop reproducing (to numeric
limits), during some interval. But when that is subsequently removed, if the
event has been destroyed restoring it to the list will be tricky.
So that argues in favour of connectivity. Cell nonexistance guarantees
that no events will take place. Probably this sholud be built into a dependency
graph, but for now I think a shared_ptr with the cell count is fine. Then
I can cull anything with 0 cells, and a triplet of rates will keep the
important part of their interaction.


27-12-17
Merry christmas to anyone reading :)
So, I might have made a terrible design decision last update, when I use member
function pointers instead of virtual functions. Aaand, there's yet another
question. Since this next-reaction approach minimizes rng by treating all
reactions individually basically, shouldn't I also split reproduction and
reproduction with mutation into two separate reactions? To be fair, with a
continuous parameter, there is actually no difference (as every new cell is
almost surely a mutant). But if there are mutations that only happen with
some probability, I could feasibly split it into two reactions. This way, if
mutaions are rare (as they should be usually) It saves generating a random
number for the mutation-induced-change in the vast majority of cases.

Still, I think I will get this implementation to a running state first.
For practice, if nothing else.


01-01-18
Happy new year!
Well, the code I have at the moment consistently segfaults at the same cell
count. I suspect it's because of vector reallocation when it is expanded.
With that in mind, It's probably worth writing a version without continuous
parameters. Then, the straightforward implementation from the paper can be used.
Having something that works should make successive versions less error prone.o
This implementation will have finite discrete types.


18-01-18
Interesting new find I think.
So, looking back at the LB-model, I don't think it's appropriate to model all
the size limitation as a increased death rate. Simply because the total number
of dead cells quickly becomes absurdly large. Now, I tried the opposite, i.e.
to model the whole limitation by lowering birth rate instead:

birthrate p*n - c*n*(n-1)
deathrate d*n

but this also produces unlikely results. Because like this, the population size
variance at equillibrium becomes very low, and population size becomes hard-
capped. Neither of which is all that realistic.

This leads me to conclude that somewhere in between is preferable.

birthrate p*n - r*n*(n-1)
deathrate d*n + s*n*(n-1)

Which should allow for a sensible number of dead cells, as well as mostly
removing the hard cap. Alas, it does introduce another unknown. But I think
it is neccessary for the model to be (more) realistic.

It follows that at equillibrium

p - r(n-1) = d + s(n-1)

and the equillibrium size is

n = 1 + (p-d)/(s+r)

since n >> 1 (in any scenario I care about) this means

(p-d)/(s+r) >> 0

p - d >> s + r

and that

p > d  and  s + r > 0

Note that while

p < d  and  s + r < 0

technically also fulfills the expected population size equation above, it has no
realistic meaning in the context of population dynamics as far as I can tell.
Basically, it becomes a repelling fixed point rather than an attractive one.
Under these circumstances,
  birth rate grows with population size
  death rate shrinks with population size
Clearly, the upper limit cannot be stable, as death rate will reach 0, at which
point the population almost surely keeps growing forever.
Similarly, the lower end is also not stable. A small downwards deviation from
the expected size will destabilize the system towards reducing the population
further.


20-01-18
Finished basic discrete type implementation (assuming the original interaction
induced death. It's already much faster than some earlier experiments of mine.
So that's nice. Next step, make this with the double interaction from above.